# Restarting the GA

In order to restart the GA after either a failed run or to run for more
generations, the `.xyz` file generated by the GA must be present. For a
MOGA run, then the `.MOGAobj` files for all population members (or
specifically all the parents and children of the last generation) must
also be present.

This is because though some information is read from the `.xyz` file the
`.MOGAobj` files are re-read to assign the objective function values for
the restart population.

In order to perform a restart the `continuation` keyword must be given
in the seed `param` file pointing to the relevant `.xyz` file. E.g. if
the seed was `Si_227`, and the directory contains the file `Si_227.xyz`
then the line `continuation=Si_227.xyz` must be added to the
`Si_227.param` file.

Restarting is done from the last completed population, so if the GA
failed part way through a generation it will restart from the beginning
of this generation. E.g. if the GA fails part way through generation 12
and a restart is performed it will restart from the beginning of
generation 12 (having to recalculate all members).

## NOTE: Restarting Generation and Randomness

The restart is performed by reading the final parent and child
population from the last completed generation. This essentially puts the
GA at the point before it selects the parents which will form the
initial population for a generation (from which the children will be
bred and evaluated).

Although the parents chosen from the parent+child population from the
previous generation will be the same, the pairs of parents chosen for
breeding may not be due to the randomness in the selection process. It
follows that the children will also probably differ.

## NOTE: Automatic File Deletion

If the GA is restarted, it will attempt to **delete all the files** used
for the "next" generation. This is the generation after the last fully
completed generation. This is because the GA needs a specific file
format for the files it creates/reads from, and having files already
existent and appending to them will break the GA workflow.

E.g. If the GA fails for some reason part way through generation 6 and
it is restarted, all files created for generation 6 will be deleted. The
GA will then restart from the beginning of generation 6.

It is important therefore to back up any files of interest for the last
uncompleted generation if they are of interest.

Note that if a generation completes successfully this is not an issue.
E.g. if the GA was set to run for 6 generations completing without
error, then the user decides to restart to run until generation 12; the
GA will start at generation 7, with no files needing to be deleted.
